so we have Douglas Valentine with us
here today we're gonna talk about the
upcoming Ken Burns PBS show the Vietnam
War doug is an author a journalist and a
poet his latest book is called the CIA
as organized crime and he's the author
of the Phoenix program a groundbreaking
work on one of the most important
aspects of the Vietnam War
so hello Doug and thanks for agreeing to
talk with us today so of course the
series is not out yet but there's been a
lot of news and a lot of hype about it
already what do you think we can expect
from Ken Burns on the Vietnam War very
emotional I think that from the little
that I heard it's going to be
disingenuous and gonna you know involve
a lot of propaganda but the one a few
things that I heard which I you know can
talk about I've read two or three
reviews but it's already very
controversial because burns the narrator
begins by saying that American
involvement in the war began with by in
good faith by decent men that you know
that that our involvement in the war was
initially something that was done in
good faith by decent people and and that
in itself is is psychological warfare
that's an example of what psychological
warfare is it's an attempt to to create
a false impression of reality and and
Burns has been questioned about that and
he says that he adheres to entity and he
believes it's true but it isn't true
it's a total line the American
involvement from the time the CIA
started operating there in 1948 with the
object of pushing the French out taking
the country over for American
corporations and until 1964 when the
Gulf of Tonkin incident which was a you
know a false flag operation and with
that the the White House under Lyndon
Johnson used to send to the
American military involvement in Vietnam
right right through to any of the
negotiations between the United States
and North Vietnam none of it was ever
done in good faith and none of the
people there behind it were decent men
they were all you know freewheeling
capitalists who were willing to lie
steal cheat slip their grandmothers
throat for a dollar 85 in order to make
a million dollars off the war so the
whole the whole premise for the Ken
Burns series is based on a lie and I'm
sure that all the rest of it is going to
be just as disingenuous and I heard you
know for example I know that the the the
the series relies on the memories and
recollections of two guys a black guy
from Boston who was a you know combat
soldier in a and a white guy from
somewhere in the Midwest you know and
and and to have a series based on the
recollections of two soldiers who had a
worm's eye view of the war at best is
totally emotional you know I mean it's
just
well now you can pick a side and I'm
going to tell you well there's one
there's you know there's two sides
you're either for or against it you know
I mean that's just a total skewing of
what the war was about it lowers it to
its absolute lowest common denominator
which is to say you're either for it or
against it and there's an argument that
can be made for either side and that's
just again total psychological warfare
that completely distorts the nature and
purpose and and all the events behind
the war so you know I'm not looking
forward through it and I I assume it's
just gonna dilute a lot of people I mean
this isn't the first time that this has
been hashed out what what do to you are
some of the biggest maybe myths that we
should have to watch out for as his
story gets retold Winston Churchill said
you know a bodyguard of lies you know
that the war is too important to leave
it to the truth you know indeed you have
to wrap up your your intentions and
plans in a bodyguard of lies you know
and that's basically what what happened
in what Vietnam from the beginning you
know the very beginning it was a war
that was based it was basically a CIA
more from 1948 until American soldiers
arrived in 1965 and even then shortly
thereafter it was realized that that the
military would never win the war that
had to be a CIA war anyway and went back
to that with the Phoenix program but the
whole the whole America's entire history
in Vietnam is is wrapped in a bodyguard
of lies you know right from the very
beginning and and all of this was
revealed when Ellsberg released the
Pentagon Papers and the Pentagon Papers
showed that from the very beginning the
military was lying and the White House
was lying about not just about the
numbers in that you know how many how
many communists were in South Vietnam or
how deep the opposition was to American
policies they just lied about everything
and and and you the only way to actually
understand the Vietnam War is to let you
know like a legal case
once you've unraveled all those lies
there's nothing luck with this but
emptiness but nothing there was nothing
but greed and avarice and and and the
desire to to conquer and control that's
laughters there's nothing but evil
intentions there is no such thing as
good faith or decent people behind the
Vietnam War and and the only way that
the Americans the public would buy it
from the beginning was because it's all
wrapped in lies and if Ken Burton was
actually going to do an honest
examination and analysis of the Vietnam
War he would just spend the entire 18
hours and ten episodes unraveling each
and every lie and revealing that at the
heart of this is darkness just there's
total just total like avarice and and
the desire to control and dominate and
exploit or just truly
the Vietnam War is about and that's why
and that's why in the Vietnam or
psychological warfare is so important
that's it really truly is developed and
become as the you know the the template
for the whole war on terror which of
course is also based on a big lie a
total lie and and from the same you know
indecent motives there's there's nothing
you know decent behind it in it and
there's no good faith in all behind the
war on terror well every every aspect of
the war on terror including the control
of the media and getting it to go along
with all these lies was developed in
Vietnam Vietnam was just a total
experimenting in psychological warfare
and how to manipulate facts in public
opinion in order to achieve a really
nefarious dark agenda well you you talk
about this series of Lies Awards is
based on I read one thing in The
Washington Post
maybe we can focus on on one of these
comparisons that burns may try to make I
read in the Washington Post that the
show is going to compare the massacre at
me lie with the battle of way you wrote
about the Battle of Hawaii in your book
I'm not sure a lot of people maybe you
can tell us a little bit about what
happened that way but is there a logical
comparison to be made here between me
lie and the battle of way the the
Americans are are writing history
rewriting history and and and the battle
of way was one of the great examples and
and it said that you know I mean hu e is
way it was at one time the Imperial City
in Vietnam before 1955 when the Soviet
Union China and the United States split
the country in half and they gave the
South to the Americans and they gave the
north that a communist I mean just to
show you how in crazy the whole thing is
you know be a helmet one time was
a unified nation and and the United
States and the Soviet Union and China
split it in half and that's you know one
of the problems began there was supposed
to be a reunification election and that
didn't occur but anyway way was sort of
the imperial capital of that what had
been the unified Vietnam until the the
country was split in half and after was
split in half way was found himself
located and in this South Vietnam and
it's up near the DMZ which was the
Demilitarized Zone the border between
North and South Vietnam weighs is
getting up that way and so it was a in
an area that was saw a lot of combat and
there was a lot of fighting going around
up there in the northern part of the
country and what my had been a place
where the cioms the the first president
president Neoga diem was from in his
family and it was a very heavy Catholic
Enclave and it was very much the center
of anti-communist activities so by it
through trying to sum up the history of
way in a few words is not easy but it's
a very focal point and they threw out
the entire history of Vietnam and it's a
very important point and there's a there
was what was called the tenth uprising
of late January 1968 when all the the
cadres who had been hiding secret cadres
the Communists Contras who had been
hiding and organizing now to cover
emerge from hiding and attacked all the
CIA bases and a lot of the American
military bases in need and the the
political places the police the
politicians that were most important to
the United States the the communist
guerrillas rose up they threw off their
cover and they start an attack in these
places the CIA's interrogation centers
the places where the secret police were
operating and and all these Vietcong
agents and just to give you a just
suppose for a second Vietcong with a
term that CIA developed immense
Vietnamese communists the the cotton
they didn't call themselves to be at
Cong it was psychological warfare
because it like they people think of
King Kong and all this kind of stuff you
know I mean they called themselves Viet
then anyway they rose up and they
started attacking all these CIA
installations and all the South
Vietnamese secret police and
intelligence agents who work for the CIA
and they had lists of their names who
these who these collaborators were and
the secret agents who were working for
the CIA and during the battle away in
the Tampa pricey they went after him and
killed a multiple of course the CIA had
been doing that to the Viacom writing up
lists death lists and and packing them
the prisons in South Vietnam full of
hundreds of thousands of these people
for 10 years 15 years by this point
executing them in summer you know
summary executions letter but it
happened during the top of that way in
way during the tenth uprising that they
went after a lot of these CIA people and
they nailed a watchable and supposedly
it's never been proven they created a
mass grave and threw all the bodies
among all these CIA collaborators and
special policemen and and and be
basically people who were traitors to
the Vietnamese supposedly threw them
into this big ditch in the ground what's
not known what's not never said is that
they they didn't have bulldozers to dig
the ditch that the the bulldozers that
they you know they used supposedly used
to dig this ditch were you know actually
caterpillars home by the you know the
United States so so there's never really
been a lot of proof that it actually
happened the way a man yeah American
historians have rewritten it it is known
for a fact that the
communists and during the uprising did
have deathless and they didn't get a lot
of people but it certainly cannot be
compared to a meal I which because the
United States through the CIA had had
been had the death list and then using
depthless and assassinating people for
15 years by that point and this was the
only instant that that the Vietcong did
it you know so you're saying that a
thousand be lives and and believe me
when I said there were a thousand
massacres and at least 10 thousands
probably more like it like me I mean
like that Americans perpetrated on the
South Vietnamese to one incident in way
in early 1968 so there's really no
comparison and again this is just how
how burns is being disingenuous and he's
you know if we hear a lot about since
Charlottesville
false equivalency and this is what this
is exactly what Burns is doing he's
trying to say the things that the CIA
did in the bill at United States
military didn't be enough 10,000 times
it is the same thing as as what the
Viacom did once or twice or here or
there so so there really is no
equivalency and you know if you look at
the numbers I mean you see the United
States killed 3 million people and South
Vietnam and in the course of the war I
mean most of these people were civilians
that they they dropped bombs on their
villages you know when they wanted to
get know if a lot of people know this
but if there was a Viacom age and in a
village and the village was you know in
hostile territory the what the United
States did was simply bomb the whole
village and kill everybody in the
village just to get one agent so so
they're really and they did that ten
thousand times there throughout the
Vietnam War so so Burns is creating a
straw man and and he's creating full
lead on this false equivalency over and
over and over again
and if it's anything like what I've
heard and just perpetuating all the the
myths that we've been taught about
Vietnam and and doing it really as a
psychological warfare and it's really
it's going to take people 10 years just
to unravel all the lies that Ken Burns
tells I'm I know I'm going back and
unraveling all the lies that the
government nobility retool and then
especially the CIA which nobody is going
it has done too much to unravel ah I did
it in my book the Phoenix program and I
really encourage anybody of your
listeners if they really want to know
what the hell happened they'd be it not
more to go read that book which is a
history of CIA operations which really
very rarely get told and and on that
point I know that burns interviewed a
CIA officer named Donald Gregg for his
series well folks I interviewed Donald
Gregg - and if you want to know really
what was going on read my book and my
interview with Donald Gregg and I'm sure
that he banged ken burns for an
opportunity to have his say in this
thing because what he still told me and
what I wrote in the Phoenix program but
there's not reflect well on him and does
not portray him as any kind of decent
person who was operating in good faith
but just real quick how do you prefer
people get your book is it on Amazon or
yeah yeah it's published by open road
Mark Millar Crispin Miller's associated
with yeah it's on Amazon you know
there's just some Valentine the Phoenix
program but but I interviewed Donald
Gregg and and the guys that work for him
and I explained how you know his
involvement with the Phoenix program and
and you know what he did as a CIA
officer and I'm just I'm just sure to
give a guy like Donald Gregg a format
yeah I mean he's really slick you know
he was a he was an ambassador to South
Korea
after the Vietnam War he said he Donald
Ryan helped set up the the Contras he
was responsible for American counter
insurgency policy in El Salvador in
Central America
he was george w bush's the first ones
national security adviser and he and and
and and he he's the one who's
responsible for el salvador in the
contra war and all the crimes war crimes
at the CIA committed there and
everything that he did in central
america he learned and experimented with
in the in south vietnam and this is the
guy that Ken Burns is going to for the
truth which is like just totally crazy
and disingenuous because nothing that
comes out of Donald Greg's mouth is
going to be anything but a lie you know
so you know be where folks buyer beware
it would be bold of them to try to give
us the we were fighting for democracy
line in this special can you talk a
little bit about the nature of the South
Vietnamese regime there well sure I mean
after the partition the and at this
point it really was a CIA war and there
was a guy named ed Lansdale who was
running what was called the the CIA
second stationed in the South Vietnam
and he was the one who arranged for this
Catholic guy GM to get elected president
they during the part after the partition
a a couple of hundred thousand Catholics
fled from North Vietnam into the south
and and this guy ZM who was a Catholic
and in a totally rigged election won
like 95% of the vote to become the first
president of South Vietnam and it was
just a total rigged election set up by
the CIA so it could put a Catholic in in
a country where Catholics represented 5%
of the population
you know the other
90% were Buddhists and then it was a
smattering of other clients of religions
but you know 90% of not more than 90% of
our country was was Buddhist and Zia
basically ran unopposed because he was
the CIA's candidate so so they created
this so called the democracy like by
creating a dictatorship and and in this
absolute phony election and then they
created a political party the see I did
call the kanlaon the personalist Labour
Party and they threw this this political
party of arranged for ZM and his family
to get all sorts of ray cloths by
selling giving every government contract
to a CIA proves American company so
right from the beginning it was just you
know and then they went and they sold
this guy's like Lansdale and his and his
mouthpieces like Joseph Alsop at the New
York Times sold it to the American
public as you know the americas created
to is creating a democracy in South
Vietnam and it was just absolute utter
total lie and and
you've got to be so bad the ZM regime
got to be was so bad an X so exploitive
the CIA created a secret police trizzie
M which did nothing but go around and
imprison his domestic political
opponents you know I mean if you were
running against ZM and and you were a
nationalist in South Vietnam
well the secret police were going to
come and arrest you at night and take
you in and any other slit your throat or
send you to prison and this is and it
got so bad by 1963 after close to seven
or eight years of this dictatorship
which was you know being sold as
democracy that that President Kennedy
said all right kill the guy get him
outta there and and they did and the CI
arranger its own puppet as he M to be
assassinated and and they they set up a
military committee that was composed of
12 Buddhist generals basically no there
might have been one or two Catholics
which then ruled the country is a
military
until 1967 when the next election
occurred and and of course that election
was also totally rigged and and a guy
named president to you was elected and
and ran a military dictatorship until
the country was overthrown at 1975 but
it's an absolute lie and fiction to
think that at any point the United
States arranged for anybody or any group
of individuals to rule South Vietnam
that was not totally in its pocket and
totally selling every contract that
could be sold to to them to the
Americans whether it be for police
services or administrative purposes or
economic purposes all that money was
going through Americans and they just
made sure that it was ever running the
country was in their pocket and arranged
for all those contracts so it was just
it was just a big grab you know a land
grab it was a grab for all the minerals
and resources in South Vietnam and all
done with you know through the
propaganda that were creating a
democracy that's going to be safe for
Catholics or whatever total lie well
that brings up an interesting point
because you mentioned the exodus of
Catholics from the north but that was
based on a psychological operation can
you talk a little bit about how was that
at Lansdale who kind of made that happen
first of all when the United States took
over South Vietnam it owned every
newspaper and every radio station and
that's staffed every newspaper and every
radio station especially the ones run by
the government with its secret agents
who were working for the CIA so every
word that came out of the country was
scripted and you know Langley
headquarters and you know and then more
about the effort of the embassy by CIA
officers so every word that was coming
out of out of Saigon and out of South
Vietnam after the Americans took over
was complete and total propaganda and
they were safe during
the migration of Catholics healthy you
know they they said things like the
Communists were sticking bamboo slivers
and that years of Catholic children so
they couldn't hear the word God you know
and they said that they they Jesus has
moved south you know and and and that
there was all sorts of atrocities being
committed against Catholics up north and
analyst stuff was spread by the New York
Times and every other mouthpiece for the
CIN and Americans thought oh my god we
gotta save these poor people we better
start doing the same things to the
Communists that they're doing to us and
of course the Communists never think any
of that they were glad to get to see to
cut the Catholics leave they don't want
them up there mucking things up you know
and you know it was like you know we'll
pay your way out go and so you know I
mean it's just people believe anything
and it's really easy to get Americans to
believe anything especially you just
have to you know I have a guy that looks
like John Wayne tell you that it's true
and everybody says oh I want to join the
Marines and I want to go fight communism
for for God and country you know I mean
our real Americans are really really
stupid when it comes to believe in the
propaganda that their governments shells
on their throat man yeah you know
especially by Framing and Catholics
against godless communists you know I
wish it just galvanized the whole
country all total lies it really gives
us a lot to think about
I'm really glad that we had a chance to
talk I think it there has to be critical
voices coming out of this is there
anything else you want to mention about
it or anything before we don't just know
more as a CIA more and up until 1965
when American troops arrived and then
again starting around 1967 68 night
especially 1967 when the Phoenix program
is is created there was a realization
that the war and there
one militarily that the only way to win
the war was to assassinate and imprison
all the the every member of a civilian
member and supporter of the National
Liberation Front the the revolutionary
group and that the CIA ran this this
effort to assassinate to identify
assassinate and imprison all these
civilians who form like a shadow
government in the country and it was one
of the greatest war crimes in the
history of the world and it's gone
unpunished
and it is the template for the war on
terror so so Ken Burns did not have me
on as a consultant to tell the public
about the Phoenix program and if he does
address it I'm sure it'll be this kind
of emotional [ __ ] that he's engaging
in I'm saying well you know you're we
did it and they did it we did it we did
it and they did it and they did it you
can't really tell it's all lies well
it's a lot to think about
I'm glad that we have you know other
voices who study this and can can talk
for the other side so thanks a lot Doug
very good talking to you hope we can
talk again let's see a couple of
episodes and then you know if there's
anything more you want to ask me I'll
come back bye
this is our hidden history
you
[Applause]